Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Cruz.
Few characters in either science fiction or fantasy have been as fascinating to readers
as Conan the Barbarian.
Conan is the creation of Robert E. Howard, a writer of the 1930s who lived in cross-plains,
Texas.
Howard filled the pulp magazines of his day with westerns, detective stories, horror stories,
science fantasy, just about anything that would sell.
But he became best known for his tales of heroic fantasy, particularly the ones that
involved Conan.
Conan was a giant barbarian who lived a swashbuckling life in the mythical, hiberian age that Howard
created.
There is nothing fancy or subtle about Conan.
He survives and flourishes by pure muscle and swordplay.
Howard's writing was colorful and exciting, and perfectly matched his hero.
Howard committed suicide in 1936 at the age of 30.
He left a number of unfinished Conan manuscripts and story ideas.
And the character of Conan was so appealing to readers that authors have recently been
writing new material on him or finishing Howard's own incomplete stories.
Noted science fiction and fantasy author L. Spray DeKamp has written Conan's stories
and become interested enough in Howard's life to write a biography of him.
We asked DeKamp if Howard was anything like Conan.
Well, everybody knows that Conan is an idealization of Howard.
In other words, the kind of person that Howard thought he would have liked to have been the
ruthless, domineering, footloose, irresponsible adventurer.
Actually, Robert, with no respect for laws and regulations.
But the key word here is idealization.
DeKamp says Howard and Conan were nothing alike.
Actually Robert was just the opposite type.
Except for hot tempers and chivalrous attitude toward women, they had nothing in common.
Robert Howard was shy, bookish, compassionate, extremely polite, and socially timid.
And he's so law abiding that he wouldn't cut across the neighbor's lot even,
although everybody else in Cross Plains did.
He was just about as different from the character Conan in the stories as a person could be.
DeKamp believes Howard yearned to live in a past age, some more heroic time than the present.
Well, Robert was always talking a lot about how he wished that he thought he'd been really in his element
if he'd been born on the Texan frontier in the 19th century or in some barbarian society
like the ancient Gauls or Gauls or somebody.
Well, I think he'd have had a very unpleasant surprise because it wasn't his temperament at all.
He was shy, bookish, introvert.
Finally DeKamp reveals that Howard had a serious mental problem.
He had an outsized monkey on his back and he was doomed from some way back.
He planned his suicide ever since he was a little boy.
He told his mother when he was a little kitty that when mama, when you die, I want to die with you.
And the foolish woman, I think, probably sort of giggled and encouraged him.
It was long plans and several people knew about it, but they didn't do anything.
The only thing you could have done with Robert was if you'd gotten him to a good shrink early enough,
quite a good many years before he actually killed himself,
something might have been done, but that of course is uncertain.
Howard wrote some 21 Conan stories, most of which appeared in Weird Tales in the 1930s.
Only one novel, Conan the Conqueror, was published and that was some time after Howard's death.
More next time about Robert E. Howard.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And David Carson.
There are subcategories coming under the general headings of science fiction and fantasy.
One of the most popular these days is heroic fantasy.
It's sometimes called sword and sorcery, a term that almost serves as a definition for the genre.
It deals with heroic barbarians swinging large bloody swords and sorcerers conjuring up all manner of demons.
And as we've said, it's popular nowadays, particularly the Conan stories of Robert E. Howard.
We asked an authority on heroic fantasy, L. Spray De Camp, to tell us why the form is so fascinating to readers.
I think that part of the popularity of the genre was a reaction to certain friends in fiction,
following the Second World War, such as the fondness for heavily subjective psychological or psychiatric stories.
Very sentimental stories, stories glorifying the little man, the anti-hero, you know, that hopeless little jerk who can't do anything right, and who has no brains or brawn or character.
And whose only function is to suffer and suffer.
Well, I think people got sort of tired of that after a while.
So they, then, between the paperback publication of the Conan stories, which I can claim the credit, I'm the one who sold them, and the paperback publication of Tolkien's Lord of the Rings, which was the other major factor in launching this boom.
Why, that got people to reading heroic fantasy on a large scale, which they are still doing.
De Camp has written his own sword and sorcery, but he's also worked on the Conan material of Robert E. Howard.
He tells us how he was introduced to Howard's stories of Conan.
He was in New York in, around the end of 1950.
And, let me see, I think it was an evil war game at Pratt's apartment or something. No, it wasn't. It was a party at Pratt's apartment.
And he handed me a copy of Conan the Conqueror, Bound in Hardback, published by Noam Press.
And he said, here, take this along. I think you might find it interesting. I don't care much for it myself, but who knows.
So I took it. It seems that Martin had, by inadvertence, sent Fletcher to review copies, and Fletcher gave me one.
So I started reading it on the train going home and was hooked right away.
Kept on until I'd read the thing through, and then I read it through again.
Howard died in the 1930s, but DeCant became so involved with the character of Conan that he started to edit some of Howard's papers and to write his own Conan stories.
And then a year later, I learned about some unpublished Conan manuscripts in the custody of the agent for the Howard Literary Estate.
And I read them, and arrangements were made with the Howard Ayers and the agent for me to edit them and arrange for publication.
And on things that go on and on and on, and build up from that.
DeCant has written original Conan material, but he's also finished incomplete Howard's stories and edited others.
DeCant is also technical advisor to a movie on Conan that will premiere this week. It's entitled Conan the Barbarian, and it will show you what heroic fantasy is all about.
More about Robert E. Howard next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is about the story of the character of the Howard Ayers and the agent for the Howard Ayers.
The story is about the character of the Howard Ayers, a character that was born in the 19th century.
Next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And David Cruz.
Robert E. Howard, the creator of Conan the Barbarian, was a paradox.
He was brought up on the arid plains of west central Texas, lived in the small country town of cross plains, and hardly did any traveling.
And he died by his own hand at the age of 30.
Yet Howard wrote heroic stories that were set in the mythical age after the fall of Atlantis.
He was fascinated with the misty, cold northern landscape in which he set his tales.
Conan, his greatest creation, was a barbarian from the north, a giant who strode across the Hyborian age, wielding a bloody broadsword.
But Howard's life was a quiet one.
He was introverted, bookish, and shy.
As far as we know, he was never in a brawl or fight of any kind.
Why did Howard create Conan and place him in a mythical northern landscape?
What sort of mind would conceive of a barbarian hero, a loner who spurned civilization?
We spoke with Dr. Charlotte Laughlin, a professor at Howard Payne University in Brownwood, Texas, not far from Howard's home in cross plains.
Dr. Laughlin is intimate with Howard's life and has done research for a Howard biography.
She believes there are some reasons for Howard's obsession with Conan.
I think that again, it was a sort of explanation for why he did not fit in with other people.
He liked to believe I am the last barbarian.
It's because in my type, Will Preveal, he liked to believe that the other people had a veneer of civilization on them that got them away from the basics that were really important.
And if you've read his correspondence with Lovecraft, they had long arguments about the physical versus the intellectual needs of a society.
And Howard would say that in the tough country where he lived, you had to be physically fit and he spent a great deal of his life, his adult life, trying to be physically fit, boxing and working out and that sort of thing.
Howard also was fascinated with the legendary past of Britain, especially with the savage Picks and the early heroes of Celtic myth.
Some of his Conan stories, such as Across the Dark River, have ancient Britain as their setting.
We asked Dr. Laughlin why Howard was so drawn to this material.
He claimed that he was full blood Irish and they were the Irish kings like some other people we know claim to be.
But there's no evidence that he certainly was not full blood Irish. People have traced his genealogy.
But this was part of his image of himself. He was trying to project other people and trying to create for himself.
There again he wrote at one time that he wrote about the barren, cold, windswept, damp areas, even though he lived here.
I think that again might be a sort of wish fulfillment who wouldn't like to be someplace where it's cold on a day like this.
He wanted to be away from where he was because I don't think we can underestimate the anger and frustration that was boiling around in Robert Howard all the time.
I see it in all of his poetry and a great deal of his fiction.
Cross Plains neighbors say that he had a big tree stump out by his yard and I believe it was a sledgehammer, not an axe.
And sometimes in the middle of the day he would go out there and you could just see that he was so tense and he would take that sledgehammer
and he would just wham it and wham it and wham it on this tree stump.
That a tremendous amount of anger he didn't fit in with other people. He wanted to be somewhere else so he wrote about something that was like nothing he had experienced.
Howard wrote Reims of Fantasy in the pulp era of the 1930s, most of it for weird tales.
We asked Dr. Loughlin why Howard wrote Fantasy. Did he have the talent to write more realistic fiction that might have gotten him out of the pulp ghetto?
He may have had the talent but I certainly don't believe he was capable of writing realistic fiction. He was not that closely tied to reality himself.
I don't believe he ever could have written realistic novels. He had to write fantasies of some sort.
More about Robert E. Howard next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show is a production of the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And David Carson.
Fantasy writer Robert E. Howard grew up in the 1920s and the 1930s in the small Texas town of Cross Plains.
But he wasn't like other small town boys. He kept to himself quite a bit.
He read a lot and used a vivid imagination to create his memorable heroic fantasies, for most of which are the stories of Conan the Barbarian.
Howard died in 1936, but some of the people in Cross Plains still remember him clearly.
We spoke with two of Howard's friends, Jack Scott, the editor of the Cross Plains newspaper, and Leroy Butler, Howard's next door neighbor.
Butler remembers a time when he and Howard were still children and they bought some swords from a mail order company in New York.
But we ordered those things and we'd get out in the backyard and wrap a band down a hamster around our hedge-like pirate.
And we'd get out fence with those things.
Of course we didn't dare, you know, hit each other with them because they were, they'd have gone through you.
But we did that quite a bit. We had an immense live oak tree in our backyard and we'd get out there and shade that oak tree in.
Pretend that we were back maybe in the dark ages or something or in the time of the Spanish man.
Things like that. He had things like that on his mind all the time.
Butler says that Robert was a loner dedicated to his writing.
Robert never married. He never seemed interested in girls.
And he did have one girlfriend there in Cross Plains for a time. I'd see him out in the car driving around once in a while.
But I don't think that lasted long.
He was just wrapped up in his, in his work writing those stories.
And he had a blast-in-back porch on the southeast side of the house there.
And it wasn't too far from my mother's bedroom.
And a lot of times at night he'd wake her up with that typewriter clock in, you know, at 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning.
Some inspiration. He'd probably be laying there in bed and think of something and he'd get up and write it down right quick.
And he just worked all hours.
Jack Scott also comments on Howard's unusual personality.
Howard was a little on the, a little, little on the odd side. He wasn't an animal.
Howard was very many people. He was rather a loaf. But he was a big robust man.
To me he was a combination of, uh, Edgar Allen and Poe and Jack London.
If you can imagine that two together.
In 1936, when Howard's mother was dying of a terminal illness, Howard took his own life.
I remember, I remember the morning he, he, he killed himself very well.
I heard on the street that Robert Howard had just shot himself.
I immediately jumped in my car and ran down there and got down there and a few neighbors had gathered.
It wasn't generally known over town, but the old justice of the peace was standing there on the gallery, the front porch.
When I walked up he called me and said, come here Jack.
I stepped up there and he took me into the bedroom and he pointed to an old underwood top rider who had the full lines written on it there.
Howard had, when he had been told that his mother wouldn't live throughout the day, he went to this top rider, wrote these full lines,
walked outside, sat down his car and shot his head off.
And this old JP asked me what these full lines meant.
They said, I'm sure you've read them all, fled all done, so let me on the tire. The feast is over, the lamps expire.
More about Robert E. Howard next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And David Cruz.
Will Conan the Barbarian ever die or will he go on forever?
A large portion of the fantasy section of bookstores these days is filled with books about Conan, the heroic barbarian created by the late Robert E. Howard.
Howard devised a mythical error for his hero and called it the Hyborian Age. The period falls somewhere between the fall of Atlantis and the beginnings of recorded history.
Conan is a giant barbarian from Samaria, a region to the north of the more civilized Hyborian kingdoms. With his huge sword, he is an irresistible force that no man can stand up to.
Howard wrote some 21 Conan stories in the 1930s, most published in the Pulp magazine, Weird Tales. They traced the life of the barbarian from his teenage years to his later maturity when he became a king.
The tales are full of lusty, bloody adventure, pure escape fantasy that appeals to man's primal instincts. Conan battles warriors, sorcerers, and monsters of all shapes.
He's a thief, a soldier, a swashbuckling pirate, and a king.
The Conan stories are so popular that a number of publishing houses have been putting them out.
And a number of different authors have been writing Conan stories. Howard left many gaps in the life of Conan, and various contemporary writers have been filling those gaps with original stories.
Elspreg de Camp was the first author to do that. These stories done by other writers are called pastiches, and established writers such as de Camp, Andrew J. Offit, Poole Anderson, Lynn Carter, and Bjorn Nyberg have done them.
We went to Robert E. Howard's home territory, the Brownwood Cross Plains area, of West Central Texas, to speak with Dr. Charlotte Laughlin and Dr. William Crider.
Dr. Laughlin has done research for a biography of Howard, and Dr. Crider teaches science fiction and fantasy at Howard Paine University.
Dr. Crider explains what a pastiche is.
Well, in the sense that we've been talking about it, it's where one writer takes a character and a world like the Hibborian Age created by another writer, and writes new stories with the same character in the same setting.
And he gets the full credit for the story, but the other writer has created the character and the historical setting.
Also, de Camp did something similar where he took incomplete Howard stories and changed them into Conan stories, which would be a pastiche of a slightly different kind,
but it's the same principle operating.
The biography of Howard, entitled Dark Valley Destiny, has been written by L. Sprague de Camp and his wife, Catherine, and will probably be out sometime in the next year.
The book will mainly be a psychological study of Howard, which attempts to explain why he wrote the kind of material he did.
Conan has been so popular that a major movie about him, entitled Conan the Barbarian, is premiering this week across the country.
It was filmed in Spain by director John Milius and produced by Dino de Laurentiis, and has muscle man Arnold Schwarzenegger playing Conan.
Early reports indicate that it does a marvelous job of conveying the atmosphere of sword and sorcery essential to a Conan adventure.
Loughlin and Crider talk about the movie and about Conan's popularity.
If this is a huge success, like Star Wars, let's say, that could give even more impetus to this kind of thing, and we may see Howard going on forever with these pastiches being done by...
...it's possible that they would be continued, because the original idea was to fill out Conan's life, you know, have his life completely covered by the pastiches from, I don't know,
he went to his boyhood, but certainly all of his adult life when he was an old King Conan, and it's already gone beyond that.
They filled out his life, and then they're going back to, you know, this stage in his life. He did such and such.
So certainly they're not going to stop with what would be the chronological life of Conan, so the potential to go on beyond is there.
The potential to keep Conan alive and adventuring is definitely there. We should be hearing a lot more from Conan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
.